In striving to improve metrics, especially to lower fuel
consumption, weight and cost, and to reduce noise and
emissions, the jet engine manufacturers world wide are
continuously looking for new concepts to introduce a step
change in the turbofan engine development. One
promising concept having been investigated for two
decades is, to apply a speed reduction gear on the low
spool of a two-shaft engine between the Fan on the one
(slow spinning) side and the LPC and the LPT on the
other (fast spinning) side, making the configuration
geared compared to the direct drive turbofan. By means
of de-coupling the Fan speed from the rest of the low
spool turbo machinery the designer gains an additional
degree of freedom which allows him to better optimize the
turbo machines independently.
The general principle of geared configuration is to further
increase bypass ratio over current designs in order to
improve propulsive efficiency and hence thrust specific
fuel consumption, and decrease noise and weight at the
same time. This is achieved by reducing Fan speed and
pressure ratio for high bypass ratio Fans, and increasing
LPC and LPT speeds and thus keeping efficiencies high
and stage and A/F count low. This requires some
fundamentally new design methods and technologies on
the component level as well. As an example the
opportunities and challenges for the high speed LPT are
presented in some detail. The high spool speeds result in
high work extraction per stage and therefore low stage
and A/F count. In addition due to the rather low stage
loading aerodynamic losses can be kept low and
efficiencies are high. On the other hand the high speeds
generally cause a high Mach Number level, and the
structural loading of the rotating hardware is very high as
well.
The technology required for a turbofan with a Fan drive
gear has been progressing extensively over the last two
decades, and significant improvements in terms of
technology readiness have been achieved. With the
upcoming GTF™ Engine Demonstrator’s first test run
planned for later this year – a joint activity between P&W,
MTU, Avio and VAC – the technology development will
peak in a flight demonstrator in 2008.
ADP Advanced Ducted Propfan
ATF Altitude Test Facility
ATFI Advanced Technology Fan Integrator
Avio Avio Propulsione Aerospaziale
BPF Blade Passing Frequency
CLEAN Component Validator for Environmentally Friendly Aero-Engine
DOC Direct Operating Cost
EIS Entry Into Service
FTB Flying Test Bed
FDGS Fan Drive Gear System
GTF™ Engine Pratt & Whitney´s Geared
Engine
HSS High Speed Seal
ICAO International Civil Aviation Organization
JB Journal Bearing
LPC Low Pressure Compressor
LPT Low Pressure Turbine
MTU MTU Aero Engines GmbH
NGPF Next Generation Product Family
PNLT Perceived Noise Level Tone corrected
P&W Pratt & Whitney
SHP Shaft Horse Power
TF Turbofan
TRB Tapered Roller Bearing
TSFC Thrust Specific Fuel Consumption
VAC Volvo Aero
VITAL Environmentally Friendly Aero Engines
V18 Bypass Nozzle Jet Velocity
Air traffic has been growing continuously over the last
decades – in terms of passenger kilometer per year as
well as in terms of the active aircraft fleet (number of
aircrafts actively participating in air transport) – and it is
predicted to grow further. FIG 1 shows the past and
predicted future air traffic development.
Air Traffic Development.
Turbofan™
Along with this generally positive development for the
aviation industry there obviously come serious challenges
for the environment (emissions), the community (noise)
and the available fuel resources which will limit the future
growth at some point. In an effort to minimize the
environmental impact the politics world wide (e.g. the
ICAO) as well as local authorities have been defining
increasingly stringent regulation for aircraft engine
emissions and community noise. As an example FIG 2
shows the development in airport noise restrictions from
1980 to 2000. A clear trend towards tighter restrictions
can be observed, which will not only impact landing fees
but mid-term limit an airline’s ability to use a particular
airport. From this perspective flight noise (and hence
engine noise contribution) is becoming an important
economic factor for the airline as well as the airport
region.
. Airport Noise Restriction Development.
Market laws of supply and demand in turn regulate the
fuel price which has been fundamentally increasing over
the years as well. Uncertainties in fuel price prediction are
rather high, various scenarios range from about $ 1.3 /
gallon (low price scenario, abundant oil and kerosene) all
the way up to more than $ 5.0 / gallon (high price
scenario, permanent oil crisis) with the most realistic
scenario averaging at about $ 2.0 / gallon (mid price
scenario, no oil shortage but high demand). Increasing
fuel prices do not only impact cash operating cost (COC)
in general, the share of fuel cost increases as well which
makes fuel burn even more one of the key requirements
for future products. Aside from the long-term increase in
fuel price the rather short-term cyclic fluctuations due to
political and economical events endanger the economic
strength of airlines with inadequate aircrafts in terms of
fuel burn.
Driven from the continuous growth in air traffic and the
resulting challenges for environment, community and the
natural oil resources the requirements for the next
generation of aircrafts and aircraft engines are very
challenging as well. FIG 3 summarizes the major design
objectives for the next generation turbofan engine from
MTU’s perspective relative to the engines in-service
today.
Next Generation Turbofan Objectives.
Aside from fuel burn, noise and emissions obviously the
other metrics directly impacting COCs are as important,
therefore time-on-wing, reliability and total maintenance
cost can not be compromised at all.
Meeting the requirements will be a challenge for any
engine supplier, but MTU - together with its partners
P&W, Avio and VAC - is convinced that the geared
engine configuration is the favorable answer. While the
concept provides a step change in performance,
emissions (due to low fuel burn) and noise, it is an
evolutionary step from the direct drive turbofan, and as a
result does not impose unreasonable risk to the customer,
as a more revolutionary step like the counter-rotating
turbo machinery concept does.
As laid out in chapter 1 one fundamental objective for the
next generation product is to reduce mission fuel burn,
which is largely driven by thrust specific fuel consumption
(TSFC). Traditionally the reduction of TSFC has been
achieved
by improved turbine cycle thermodynamic
efficiency or
by improved propulsive efficiency.
Improved cycle efficiency can be achieved by the increase
of overall pressure ratio and peak cycle temperatures,
which is usually limited by available materials and/or
cooling techniques. Obviously improved component
efficiencies are also a major contributor.
Propulsive efficiency of a turbofan engine in turn is mostly
dependent on bypass nozzle jet velocity V18 for a given
flight condition. Propulsive efficiency will be high when
V18 is low. Low V18 can be achieved by low Fan pressure
ratio which requires a large Fan diameter for a given
thrust demand. Therefore the Fan speed has to be
reduced to keep Fan tip speed in a reasonable order of
magnitude in terms of transonic losses and resulting
efficiency. The natural outcome of applying this design
philosophy is a high bypass ratio turbofan engine with a
rather low flow specific thrust. The general trends of Fan
pressure ratio and bypass ratio can be seen in FIG 4.
. Turbofan Engine Concepts with Varying Bypass
and Fan Pressure Ratio.
Along with the low jet velocity V18 comes low jet noise
(see [1] for details), and because of the correspondingly
slow Fan speed the Fan emitted sound pressure level and
hence noise level is low as well, at least for the ducted TF,
the geared and counter rotating configurations. For
dramatically increased bypass ratios and un-ducted Fan
configurations noise becomes a serious issue. FIG 5
shows the general trends of TSFC and noise versus flow
specific thrust (Fan diameter, bypass ratio) for ducted
turbofan engines.
. Ducted Direct Drive Turbofan Noise, TSFC
Fuel Burn Trends.
When applying the above described concept of low flow
specific thrust and large Fan diameter, which goes along
with slow Fan speed, the direct drive turbofan suffers from
increasing length, weight and cost of the other low spool
turbo machinery (LPC, LPT). This is due to the fact that
the LPC and LPT have to convert shaft horse power into
work potential and vice versa at a low spool speed level,
which requires a large number of stages and as a result a
large A/F count. Additionally the torque transmission
requirement for the low pressure shaft increases, while
the maximum diameter is limited by a more and more
reduced diameter of the core engine. FIG 5 shows the
adverse trend of increasing Fan diameter and bypass
ratio on fuel burn driven by the weight increase of the
other low spool components of a direct drive turbofan.
This problem can be overcome by de-coupling the Fan
from the low spool speed by means of a Fan Drive
Reduction Gear System. The FDGS allows the LPC and
the LPT to run at higher and more appropriate speeds,
thus reducing length, weight and cost for the same
specific work output. Obviously this advantage comes with
the additional weight of the FDGS itself which is more
than offset by the reduction in LPT stages relative to a
direct drive turbofan.
The impact of increasing Fan diameter and bypass ratio
on fuel burn for the geared engine configuration is shown
in FIG 6 in addition to the directed drive curve already
discussed in FIG 5. Compared to the direct drive the
geared turbofan provides minimum fuel burn at higher Fan
diameter / bypass ratio. Hence the geared turbofan
concept is the enabler for turbofan engines with bypass
ratios beyond today’s designs with the benefit of low
noise, low TSFC and achieving low fuel burn at the same
time. Therefore the geared engine configuration
contributes significantly to achieving two of the key design
objectives discussed in chapter 1 – low mission fuel burn
and low noise (see also [3]).
. The Geared Turbofan Concept as the Enabler of
High Bypass Ratio Turbofan Engines.
As derived from the fundamental thoughts in chapters 2.1
and 2.2, the geared engine configuration offers the
advantages of a high bypass ratio turbofan engine with
correspondingly
slow Fan speed,
low Fan pressure ratio and bypass nozzle jet velocity,
high propulsive efficiency and
low Fan noise and jet noise,
but avoids the drawbacks a direct drive high b
ratio concept like
low LPC and LPT efficiency and
increased overall engine length and weight stemming
especially from the low spool components LPC and
LPT on the low speed level.
IG 7 summarizes the opportunities mentioned above.
. The Geared Engine Configuration –
Opportunities.
ypass
Thus the geared engine configuration allows
turbofan engine with
improved (reduced) TSFC and mission fuel burn,
reduced engine noise level,
reduced length, weight and number of parts and
reduced maintenance cost.
FIG 8 shows the fuel burn and noise potentials for a
GTF™ engine versus a direct drive turbofan concept and
versus existing engines for the thrust class of a single
aisle airplane application.
he GTF Engine Concept – Metrics Potentials.
A new concept like the GTF™ engine obviously brings
some challenges to the table, which have to be addressed
carefully in order to get the technology ready for the
product application. As a matter of fact the GTF™ engine
concept focuses on the low spool components. The high
spool components are not different compared to those of
the high spool of an advanced twin-spool direct drive
turbofan engine.
When compared to a direct drive turbofan with the same
Fan diameter (and hence similar TSFC), the GTF™
engine weight is significantly lower because the FDGS
weight is easily outweighed by the long and heavy LPC
and LPT components of the direct drive due to the
increased stage count and size relative to the GTF™
engine. When comparing the GTF™ engine to a lower
bypass ratio direct drive turbofan (more the optimum
direct drive configuration) the GTF™ engine might come
out a bit heavier, but obviously has a significant TSFC
benefit, see FIG 6. Relative to the direct drive the weight
contributions from the components are quite different. For
the GTF™ engine the Fan and LPC groups including the
FDGS add up to a significantly higher portion of the total
propulsion system weight, which is compensated for
mostly by the LPT and the low shaft, see FIG 9.
. Weight Breakdown Engine versus Direct
Drive TF.
The FDGS losses fundamentally impact TSFC in a
negative manner. This is indeed a minor issue because of
the rather high gearbox efficiency and the fundamental
conceptual benefit in propulsive efficiency of the GTF™
engine. Nevertheless the FDGS losses have to be kept as
low as possible. These losses are an additional heat
source for the oil system as well. Therefore the thermal
management system has to be designed carefully to avoid
oil overheating by providing sufficient cooling capacity of
the fuel-cooled and air-cooled oil coolers. Key to success
is obviously to reduce heat rejection as far as possible by
minimizing FDGS losses.
The major low spool components which n
are
the Fan,
the Fan Drive Gear System,
the high speed LPC and LPT.
The Fan is not too different from a direct drive design. It
features highly 3D swept aerodynamic profiles, and due to
the lower spool speed losses are fundamentally reduced.
As mentioned already the higher bypass ratio and higher
Fan diameter result in a larger contribution of the Fan
component to engine weight. Hence design methods
and/or alternate materials (light weight aluminum,
composites) are key to weight reduction.
an Drive Gear System
As with any other new or additional component to a
propulsion system one has to be concerned about
reliability in terms of flight safety as well as maintenance
cost. Gearboxes have been used in engines for flight
application for a long time. Examples include
propeller aircraft (Tyne, TP400, PT6),
regional aircraft (ALF 507, TFE 731) and
helicopters (MTR390, PT6).
Some of these engine fleets (and the gearboxes) have
accumulated millions of flight hours over the years (e.g.
the PT6 engine series). Initial reliability problems with
Tyne and ALF507 (RJ85) engines were resolved and are
being understood. FIG 10 provides an overview of P&W’s
in service experience with reduction gearboxes in
turboprop and turboshaft engines.
IG 10. P&W Reduction Gearbox In Service Experience.
d attention
The gearbox transmitted power for the next generation
product to power the single aisle airplanes will be higher
than for the applications in service today. FIG 11 provides
a comparison of the gearbox transmitted power during
takeoff operation for a variety of engines. It shows that the
ADP Demonstrator Gearbox and the NGPF GTF™ Engine
Gearbox are at the high end of the applications.
IG 11. Gearbox Transmitted Power at Takeoff
Operation.
The transmission power demand is one major sizing
parameter for the FDGS and its components (gears,
journal bearings). During the design of the gears and
bearings themselves proven standard practice design
methods and tools (validated and calibrated to rig and
engine experience) as well as standard materials and
manufacturing processes are used by our partners P&W
and Avio. Furthermore it is made sure that the structural
loads are in a well known design range. FIG 12 lists some
relevant design parameters for the gears and bearings,
and provides numbers for the NGPF application gearbox
relative to the proven design space based on P&W’s
reduction gearbox experience. It can be concluded that
the gearbox design is within the limits of the known design
space proven by several million flight hours of the PT6
engine family and other commercial and military engines.
IG 12. Gearbox Design Space Relative to Experience.
Aside from using standard design practice, the key to a
successful development of a FDGS for the next
generation product GTF™ engine is a systematic
technology development program including rig testing,
engine ground and engine flight testing. MTU’s partners
P&W and Avio have been testing planetary and star
system gearboxes in three engine demonstrators and in
several rig tests to date. Most of the testing was
performed full scale in a design space of up to 40k SHP.
Furthermore in preparation for the GTF™ Engine
Demonstrator program P&W and Avio are carrying out a
complete rig test program with several gearbox assets to
investigate efficiency, fatigue, loads and deformations,
lubrication and heat rejection under various operating
conditions including full power and even over-speed, overtorque and over-load, various angles of attack, oil flow
interruption and windmilling. During the upcoming GTF™
Engine Demonstrator flight tests the journal bearings will
be exposed to flight situations without oil supply as could
occur in emergency situations as e.g. during zero g flight
conditions. FIG 13 provides an overview of 20+ years of
FDGS technology maturation, and it also shows the
corresponding risk reduction to prepare the FDGS for the
product application.
IG 13. 20+ Years Of FDG Technology Maturation.
High Speed LPC and LPT
Both the LPC and the LPT are exposed to elevated levels
of rotational speed and hence tip speed. This results in
high Mach number flow, but less turning is required for the
given specific work. Fundamentally aerodynamic
efficiency will benefit from those conditions, but high Mach
numbers (potentially in combination with low Reynolds
numbers for low thrust applications) have to be handled
carefully. The high rotational speeds on the other hand
cause high structural loading of the rotating airfoils and
subsequently the disks. Therefore blade and rotor design
has to be done carefully in order to achieve well balanced
structural loads avoiding stress peaks, otherwise the low
stage count weight benefit will be compensated by heavy
rotating hardware.
A more detailed review of opportunities and challenges on
the component level is provided in chapter 3 for the LPT.
In general the Geared Turbofan concept is applicable to
various aircraft sizes (business, single aisle, wide body)
and missions (regional, mid range, long range). The
physics based benefits over the direct drive turbofan in
terms of noise, TSFC and fuel burn as well as engine
length, weight and cost are valid for all applications.
Obviously the GTF™ engine is the prime concept for
applications focusing on low TSFC and noise and thus
demanding for high bypass ratio engines. This is
especially true for long range missions and wide body
airplanes, but also for mid range single aisle airplanes
and regional jets. Business jet applications often focus
more on weight as an absolute metrics and compromise
on TSFC, hence staying with lower bypass ratios where
the direct drive turbofan is more attractive in terms of fuel
burn and DOC.
The maintenance cost benefits due to reduced stage and
airfoil count of the GTF™ engine are obviously valuable
for all applications as well.
A potential physical limitation for all high bypass turbofan
applications is the required ground clearance for under
wing installation, which is more challenging because the
GTF™ engine typically features a larger fan diameter for
the given thrust class than the direct drive turbofan. For
most applications including existing wide body and single
aisle airplanes this is not a limitation though.
Opportunities and challenges of the high speed LPT result
from the elevated rotational speed level due to decoupling
from the Fan speed by means of the FDGS.
The high rotor speed allows for a significantly reduced
stage count of the turbine for a given work extraction.
Compared to a conventional turbine the stage count can
roughly be cut in half at rather low aerodynamic loading
per stage. This leads to significantly reduced airfoil count
and part numbers over all, and therefore lowers
manufacturing costs and reduces maintenance costs as
well.
FIG 14 shows the V2500 LPT and the high speed LPT of
the technology demonstrator CLEAN which provide similar
shaft horse power. The speed level was increased for
CLEAN by 60% over the V2500, consequently the stage
count was reduced from 5 to 3 stages and the blade count
went down to 40%.
IG 14. Reduction of Part Numbers with High Speed LPT.
Even though the disks of the high speed LPT are much
heavier due to elevated centrifugal loads, the overall
design is much more compact, which leads to lower LPT
weight in the end.
Assuming an optimum bypass ratio for both the direct
drive TF and the GTF™ engine, the weight of the high
speed LPT can be reduced to about 70% of the
conventional LPT weight. As described above the GTF™
engine has an additional TSFC benefit. To evaluate the
weight opportunity of the LPT due to the GTF™ engine
concept only, a direct drive TF and a GTF™ engine with
the same (high) bypass ratio have to be compared. In this
case the weight of the high speed LPT can be reduced
even further down to 60% relative to the conventional
LPT. This potential counteracts the weight increase of the
GTF™ engine due to other new or heavier components as
shown in FIG 9.
The high speed LPT achieves high specific work output by
means of high rotational speed per stage. This allows to
keep the aerodynamic loading ∆H/u in a reasonable
range, which is typically on a lower level than in
conventional turbines. Therefore efficiency levels can be
kept high.
Additionally the average row velocity ratio can exceed
values of c /c ≈ 2.3, while conventional modern turbines
are more in the range of around 1.8. This enlarges the
area of laminar flow at the airfoil and reduces friction
losses.
The aerodynamic design of high speed LPTs was subject
of a number of technology programs in the past. Detailed
results can be found e.g. in [2] and are therefore not
discussed in this paper any further.
The fundamental tone frequencies (BPF) of the high
speed LPT at landing condition (approach) are in the
order of 7 kHz and higher. However, sound of high
frequencies propagating through the atmosphere is highly
attenuated. Furthermore the frequency related noisiness
of the high speed turbine tones perceived by the human
ear (PNLT weighing) is significantly lower. Advantageous
for the frequency characteristic is the absence of turbine
tones at the higher harmonics (2BPF, 3BPF etc.) even at
approach condition enabled by a favorable choice of
blade numbers. In consequence, the tonal turbine sound
at higher rotational speed in terms of take-off condition is
even more dampened or not hearable beyond the
frequency of 10 kHz.
The intentionally high rotor speed is very challenging for
the mechanical turbine design and the corresponding
turbine weight.
FIG 15 shows the design strategy and dependencies for a
lightweight design of a turbine stage.
First of all a sophisticated outer shroud design is needed
to reduce centrifugal forces for the airfoil (1). The airfoil
itself has to carry the loads caused by the outer shroud
and of its own tip section (2). The mass of the airfoil
including the outer shroud defines the airfoil root (3). The
blade (airfoil including shroud and root) defines the radial
load of the disk on the one side (4a), and the thickness of
the casing to contain a blade in case of a blade loss event
on the other side (4b).
IG 15. Dependencies for Lightweight LPT Design.
In FIG 16 a comparison is shown between the outer
shroud of a conventional and a high speed LPT blade. To
reduce mass a careful cut back is necessary without
significant spoiling of the axial and circumferential sealing
properties (see dotted contour on the right side).
Additionally the knife edges should be used to increase
the stiffness of the overhanging parts of the shroud in
order to reduce shroud curling. The axial length of the
airfoil and the radius of the center of gravity of the outer
shroud are two additional major parameters which impact
centrifugal loads caused by the outer shroud. Both
parameters affect aerodynamics though, and therefore
can not be reduced below a certain limit without major
efficiency loss.
IG 16. Conventional versus High Speed Blade Outer
Shroud Design.
The relevant parameter for the mechanical loads caused
by the airfoil due to centrifugal forces is AN with A as
annulus area at the turbine stage considered, and the
rotor speed N. These loads have to be supported by the
airfoil itself as well as by the disk.
The tip section of an airfoil is usually designed for
minimum acceptable thickness with respect to castability.
Hence a dedicated increase of cross sectional area of the
airfoil from the tip to the root (airfoil taper) is required to
limit the stress level in the airfoil. A high allowable mean
stress level is highly important for controlling the blade
weight. The acceptable mean stress level depends on the
material properties (HCF, Creep) and on the required
margins for local peak stresses (caused by blade shape,
vibratory stress, local defects and tolerances). The airfoil
root area must be optimized as well to reduce the loads at
the outer disk rim to transfer the loads from the airfoil
smoothly into the disk rim. Therefore root area, root angle
and fir tree shape must be optimized. FIG 17 shows the
typical differences between conventional and high speed
blade design, as the cut back of the outer shroud, the
airfoil taper and the axial length of the blades root area.
IG 17. Conventional versus High Speed Blade Design.
In FIG 18 the effect of the high centrifugal loads for the
disk design is shown. In conventional designs flanges
used to mount the disks are usually between the disks to
have access to the nuts and screws. In high speed LPTs
flanges and spacers must be kept close by the disks to
limit the hoop stress in the parts as known from HPT or
HPC design. Therefore the flanges are located close to
the disks which adds mass to the disk web itself. To carry
these large radial loads a broad hub on the lowest
possible radius is needed. A smooth transition into the
web limits the radial and the hoop stress.
IG 18. Conventional versus High Speed Disk Design.
Caused by high rotor speed and reduced stage count and
therefore high pressure ratios, high flow Mach numbers
throughout the turbine will tend to increase losses and
decrease efficiency.
Therefore it is beneficial to increase the flow path area
especially in the front stages by a rather steep interturbine
duct and a large outer annulus radius. In the rear part of
the turbine the maximum radius of the annulus is limited
by the nacelle line. In this area thin airfoils on a high
stress level with low blockage are important to reduce the
exit Mach number.
In addition, for low thrust and high flight altitude engine
applications the Re number is low which increases the
tendency to flow separation. Therefore the aspect ratio of
the airfoils should be reduced to minimize losses.
Due to high stage pressure ratios the leakage over outer
and inner air seals will increase. This illustrates the need
for a careful seal design. Brush seals and floating static
inner air seal rings help to reduce leakage significantly.
Special endwall design helps to minimize the impact of
the leakage to the main flow in the gas path.
For low shaft shear events an overspeed protection
system is required to limit the burst margin for LPT disks
required beyond maximum normal operating speeds. If
the shaft shear occurs upstream of the low spool thrust
bearing, no axial shift of the low shaft and as a result of
the LPT rotor occurs. In this case an overspeed protection
on the system level, like a fast fuel shut-off mechanism
(electronically or mechanically) is required. Alternatively
this event can be excluded by definition when using prime
reliable parts in the relevant areas.
If the shaft shears downstream of the thrust bearing, an
immediate axial shift of the LPT occurs. In this case a
mechanical intermeshing system can avoid a critical
overspeed of the rotor. Because rotor speed is much
higher than in conventional turbines, the driving torque of
the shaft is much lower for a given power demand. This
torque has to be counter balanced by blade to vane
interactions at the intermeshing location to avoid a rapid
acceleration of the turbine. On the other hand the high
speed LPT rotor moment of inertia and speed are
significantly higher than in conventional turbines and
hence the total energy of rotation is very high. This energy
has to be dissipated during the intermeshing event into
heat.
As laid out in chapter 2 the GTF™ engine is the best
suited concept to fulfill the stringent fuel burn and noise IG 20. LPT
requirements of the next generation turbofan engine
products at the same time. In order to prepare its
application to a product MTU together with its partner
companies P&W, Avio and VAC follows through a
continuous program of technology development and
demonstration for the last two decades. The whole scope
of technologies from parts to module to engine level is
addressed analytically as well as via rig test programs and
engine demonstrators. The objective is to get the GTF™
engine concept including all parts and module level
technologies ready for application to a product at the
latest by mid to end of 2008 in order to protect a potential
next generation product Entry-Into-Service of 2012.
For the front end of the engine P&W and Avio work
towards maturation of various areas of technology. FIG 19
shows an overview of the major rig test activities and how
they feed into the GTF™ Engine Demonstrator program.
Focus is on
Fan and LPC aero and structures testing with
appropriate rotational speed level and therefore aero
and structural design space,
mechanical systems like bearings (tapered roller
bearings, journal bearings) and high speed seals for
performance, endurance, oil distribution and
interruption and misalignment, and
the FDGS in terms of performance, durability and
reliability.
IG 19. Front End Technology Maturation Plan.
MTU has been continuously working on its LPT
technology maturation programs as well. As an example
of the previous work ref [1] summarizes the development
and testing of the high speed LPT for ATFI. FIG 20
provides an overview of the technology development
activities for the high speed LPT.
Technology Activities.
Main focus is on:
advanced 3D aerodynamics (high lift airfoils, end wall
contouring) especially for high Mach number and low
Reynolds number applications,
low noise designs taking into account the elevated
blade passing frequencies due to the high speed
design,
light weight low density materials e
rotating airfoils (TiAl),
high AN blade design (high mean stress levels), and
brush seals for reduced leakage, low deterioration
and low maintenance cost in a high speed
environment.
As for the front end technologies the objective is to reach
technology readiness for all high speed LPT required
technologies in time to protect an EIS date of 2012. FIG
21 shows MTU’s LPT technology maturation plan on a
timeline. The rig test programs and the engine
demonstrator programs complement one another in order
mature the technologies with all aspects being
considered.
IG 21. LPT Technology Maturation Plan.
Complementing the rig tests programs and taking the
learning one step further on the systems level, MTU,P&W,
Avio and VAC have been running engine demonstrator
programs all along. For more than 15 years these
companies have been partnering to demonstrate the
benefits of the geared engine configuration with
demonstrator engines, the most important and successful
ones being
(cid:127) the Advanced Ducted Propfan (ADP) in 1993,
the Advanced Technology Fan Integrator (ATFI) in
2001, and
the European Technology Program CLEAN in
see [4].
FIG 22 shows the ADP and the ATFI engines which have
covered the takeoff thrust range of 13 klb up to 50 klb.
The ADP has featured an MTU high speed LPC and LPT
and completed sea-level tests at P&W’s Florida facility as
well as altitude tests at NASA Ames’ ATF in 1993. The
ATFI build 1 has featured an MTU high speed LPT which
was successfully tested in a low spool dedicated engine
test at P&W Canada’s sea-level test bed in 2001.
The next step in this continuous line of geared engine
technology demonstrator engines is the GTF™ Engine
Demonstrator program which is going to test towards the
end of 2007, see FIG 22. This engine will be designed for
the thrust class of engines for the NGPF airplanes.
Compared to the demonstrator programs so far the
upcoming GTF™ Engine Demonstrator program will be
the first one to include flight tests, hence taking all the
specially f
aircraft/engine installation and integration aspects into
account.
IG 22. Geared Engine Configuration Demonstrators
As mentioned above the GTF™ Engine Demonstrator will
be the first flight test demonstrator program of the GTF™
engine concept by the involved partner companies P&W,
MTU, Avio and VAC. This will take the technology
maturation from the engine level to the propulsion system
level, which we consider to be a very significant milestone
on our journey to technology readiness of the GTF™
engine concept.
The program is lead by P&W as the partner being
responsible for the low spool compressors, Fan Diffuser,
HPT, system design and component integration as well as
for all interfaces to the test beds including the flying test
bed aircraft. In addition significant partner participation is
ensured by MTU (HPC and LPT), Avio (FDGS), VAC
(TEC) and Goodrich (Nacelle). FIG 23 shows the partner
participation for the major components.
2004,
IG 23. GTF Engine Demonstrator –
The engine is comprised from the PW6000 core, the
CLEAN LPT and TEC adapted to the PW6000 inter
turbine duct, and an all new front end including a high
bypass ratio low pressure ratio Fan, a high speed LPC
and a Fan Drive Reduction Gear System.
Partnership.
The program timeline foresees target-to-fire in November
2007 at the P&W ground test facility in Florida, USA.
Subsequently the engine will be installed on a P&W
owned FTB (Boeing 747) in New York State, USA, flight
tests are scheduled for 2008. The program is intended to
demonstrate technology readiness for the GTF™ engine
concept by end of 2008, see FIG 19.
The engine’s test program will focus on key learning
which has not yet been achieved in the previous
demonstrator programs. The FTB will especially provide
learning for
the in-flight performance and operability including
extreme operating conditions as e.g. windmilling and
windmill relights, and
the functionality and performance of the FDGS and
the thermal management system under real flight
conditions including zero-g, windmilling, windmill
relight, maneuver loads and deflections.
Furthermore the tests will provide significant insight into
the aircraft/engine installation and integration aspects
which can only be learned once the real aircraft/engine
integration is executed. The upfront ground tests allow for
detailed acoustics tests as well as for system functionality
checks and check-out of the engine for flight.
In a world of continuously growing air traffic the demand
for environmentally friendly aircraft engines is strong.
Market requirements focus on emission and noise
reduction, but also on purely economically driven
objectives like fuel burn and TSFC caused by the
increasingly high fuel prices, and production and
maintenance cost.
The geared turbofan is the only turbofan engine concept
which allows significant reduction in fuel burn,
maintenance cost and noise at the same time, and which
will be technology ready near-term to support EIS dates
the aircraft manufacturers and airline customers are
envisioning. While the ducted counter-rotating Fan engine
architectures are promising in terms of TSFC and fuel
burn, their technology readiness is more than one decade
away. Open rotor concepts (un-ducted Fans) are likely to
provide even higher TSFC and fuel burn benefits, but are
struggling with achieving noise requirements as we
understand them today, and are likely to require dramatic
changes in terms of engine/airframe integration. Hence
the GTF™ engine is THE best concept for the demands of
the market.
In order to mature the geared engine configuration
technology MTU and its partners P&W, Avio and VAC
have been following through a series of technology
development programs on the parts, module and system
level for the last two decades. The efforts include rig
testing as well as engine system ground testing, as e.g.
during ADP, ATFI and CLEAN programs. The current
GTF™ engine demonstrator program is the next logical
step taking technology maturation to the propulsion
system level by a flight test demonstrator. Based on these
activities the GTF™ engine concept is going to achieve
technology readiness in 2008 to support a next generation
product EIS date as early as 2012.
The authors would like to thank the companies MTU Aero
Engines GmbH and Pratt & Whitney for the permission to
publish this document.
Special thanks go to the MTU team within MTU’s
advanced programs organization, which performed the
recent high speed LPT conceptual design studies.
Furthermore the support of Pratt & Whitney’s program
and engineering leadership team for the next generation
product family is gratefully acknowledged.
] D. Crichton, E. de la Ros Blanco, T. R. Law, J. I.
Hileman, 2007,
Design and Operation for ultra low noise takeoff,
AIAA 2007-0456.
] F. J. Malzacher, J. Gier, F. Lippl, 2003,
Aerodesign And Testing Of An AeroMechanically Highly Loaded LP Turbine, ASME GT2003-38338.
] J. S. Sabnis, 2005,
Emissions and Noise – Next Frontier For Aircraft
Engine Technologies, presented at the AIAA/AAAF
Aircraft Noise and Emissions Reduction Symposium,
Monterey, California, USA.
] G. Wilfert, B. Kriegl, H. Scheugenpflug, J. Bernard, X.
Ruiz, S. Eury, 2005,
CLEAN – Validation of a High Efficient Low NOx core,
a GTF™ Engine High Speed Turbine and an
Integration of a Recuperator in an Environmental
Friendly Engine Concept, AIAA – 2005 – 4195.
