irline Scheduling: ervie
or(s): MA
Source: Transportation Scien
1985), pp. 127-138
blished by: INF
Stable U L: https:// w.jstor.org
INFORMS
Science
IS F. X.
y 1985, Vol. 19, No. 2, Air Tran
/stable/25768168
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms
is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Transportation
sportation (
paper, we present an overview of contributions to airline sched
uling made by operations research professionals during the past
20 years or so. The overview follows the development of airline
quantitative optimization techniques to the recent trends toward
participate in the "construction* and "evaluation" of schedules,
ristics.
n a commercial airline the flight schedule is a central element of the
also the production plan. Given a flight schedule, a significant portion of
costs and revenues are fixed. Optimization of the flight schedule, there
portation system which satisfies public objectives.
Recognizing the central nature of the schedule, OR professionals both
within and outside of airlines have been working on the development of
been discussed extensively in the symposia and study group meetings of
Research Societies), a kindred society of IFORS and at other professional
127
society meetings. Some of the work has been published in the relatively
been documented in internal company reports, informal reports, or not
Much of the early work was on models which can readily be form
general terms, such a model may be formulated as follows.
senger origin-destination pair ("market") over the time-of-the-day
and the day-of-the-week of the planning cycle;
departure and arrival which maximize profits.
Mathematical programming was thought to be the method for obtain
ing optimal solutions. These modeling efforts were essentially an exten
sion of the formulation by Dantzig.111
schedules it was necessary to represent airline operations in considerable
determining concurrent flows of passengers, cargo, aircraft, and flight
crews through a space-time network and scheduling the aircraft mainte
based resources, such as airport gates. It is inseparable from the market
ing plan. Representing all this detail led to ever-increasing complexity of
largely because computers at the time were not capable of handling the
solving some sort of closed-form model.
tion: its effects extend into almost every department. For another, there
It is therefore recognized that the airline scheduling problem is best
ulated
airline participate. Much of the work may be handled by a computer, but
many of the crucial decisions and choices are made by humans. Systems
central planning department develops a draft schedule which is evaluated
by the various operating departments in terms of feasibility and econom
iterative process is continued until either covergence is reached or time
Most airlines today either explicitly or implicitly have a system of this
evolutionary process. Critical elements of the systems are
Clear definition and allocation of responsibilities.
Quantitative models are used throughout these systems: for construct
ing the draft schedules and for evaluating them according to the criteria
of the various operating departments.
plified demand f ction; the aircraft w
ces to schedule construction m
previously selected. While some old m
achine interactive environ
ith t eir operating character
odels are also contained in a survey o
odels were entirely com uter based
t in w ich t e selection of fligh
second step determines departure times on the basis of the time-of-the
day variability of demand and of the possible connections of flights to
non[54]). In the third step, departure times are checked for operational
(Loughran,151 Richter,[55'56] Etschmaier,[121 Tewinkel,1571 Struve,1531
Which approach is best for solving the aircraft scheduling problem for
and the market structure (density, volume and elasticity of demand). For
approach very useful. On the other hand, an airline in a highly competi
tive market with a demand highly sensitive to time will obtain meaning
are the responsibility of the various operating departm
schedule for the aspects of particular importance to it. The objective of
and the revenues that will accrue from flying the proposed sched
ents, each one of
ment's operating responsibility, a change would be desirable.
ments involves the development of relatively detailed tactical plans. The
following operational factors are usually considered explicitly:
5. Aircraft maintenance requirements.
Evaluation according to each factor requires a different type of model.
For an extensive discussion of these models we refer to Etschmaier and
function essentially simulates the choices which passengers make in view
ment and fares, and limited aircraft capacities. In view of the increased
competitiveness of the airline industry, most of the more recent work
that is actually applied by airlines is not in the public domain. Published
ran,[5] mathaisel,[61] WAN and jowett,1621 pollack,1631 Elias,1291 buhr
et al.,[64] Shaw,(65'66] Walker-Powell,[67] Teong,[68] and Barnard.[69]
an airline schedule amounts to interdependent movements of aircraft,
required to determine to what extent some disturbance of the schedule
(e.g., through inclement weather, or through airspace congestion) prop
Evaluation of the flight schedule in terms of cockpit and cabin crews
Evaluation of the flight schedule in terms of ground crews and ground
and facilities. Examples for the types of problems that have to be solved
are the assignment of gates to aircraft, and rostering for ground crews.
by the schedule, and given the maintenance resources that are available.
A discussion of the interdependence that exists between the flight sched
ule and maintenance is given in Etschmaier and Rothstein.170,711 Models
Several airlines today have an extensive repertoire of heuristic proce
machine interactive procedures. We expect that future work will largely
concentrate in this direction, with numerical displays replaced by color
Deckwitz1321). Also, there is room for the enhancement of many of the
procedures currently in use.
Although technologies are available for quantifyin
is able to assimilate these phenomena with any degree of efficiency. As
a consequence, work on airline scheduling now seems to be concentrating
handling the very tedious arithm
suggesting new
To date, the role of the com
g qualitative phenom
etic chores involved in determining the
solutions or alterations to existing solutions in the ligh
puter has been rather limited and the full
between man and comp
underestimated. These contributions lie mainly in the conceptualization
and formulation of the scheduling process. This by no means simple or
evolves as well as of the desirable kind of interaction between man and
computer. Significant work has been carried out in both areas.
too unpredictably. At the time when the actual flight schedule is
firmed up, most decisions about investments and resource deploy
ment have been made and are irrevocable. The type of model which
builds on all the available resources rather than on just the aircraft
(b) Through various forms of discount fares, it is possible to change
of a sizeable part of the passenger demand. New forms of demand
to be devised. Although it can be argued that a schedule should be
that inclusion of potential discount traffic will make a significant
rently available are capable of either determining which stations
mined?finding the best times for the "banks of flights." Clearly,
uter, and there are few which employ imbedded
there is a need for such models, but before they can be developed,
a more thorough understanding of the dynamic nature of hubs is
(d) The relative importance of the various factors in the cost equation
has been changed dramatically. On one hand, the price of fuel has
other, nondepreciated aircraft. The consequence of both is that the
mixing aircraft of different capacities and efficiencies. This prin
time, as in the Eastern Airlines shuttle service. The possibility of
requirements could be included explicitly in future generations of
the past, investment decisions such as the purchase of new aircraft
today's environment this is no longer meaningful. What is required
include minimization of risk. Some initial work in this direction is
reported in Mathaisel.[38] It is clear now that risk should have been
major carriers might have been different if risk had been consid
tance of flexible, interactive planning systems with effective synergism
between man and the computer.
in the Airline's Planning Cycle," AGIFORS 10, 1970.
7. I. Elce, "The Development and Implementation of Air Canada's Long Range
11. R. W. Simpson, Scheduling and Routing for Airline Systems, Massachusetts
Industrial Engineering, Systems Management Engineering and Operations
Research, University of Pittsburgh, 1973.
of Vehicles and Crews, The State of the Art," Comput. Opns. Res. 10 (No.
NATO Conference, Sanderfjord, Norway, 1972.
17. Y. Chan, "Configuring a Transportation Route Network Via the Method of
Successive Approximation," Comput. Opns. Res. 1 (No. 1) (1973).
19. R. Larson, State Increment Dynamic Programming, pp. 238-275, American
20. A Levin, Some Fleet Routing and Scheduling Problems for Air Transporta
tion Systems, MIT, ORSA Third Annual Israel Conference on Operations
Systems, Report No. FTL R68-5, Flight Transportation Laboratory (Jan
23. D. benbasset, Minimal Aircraft Flows in a Schedule Network with Bundles,
unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. of Civil Engineering, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, 1969.
Analyzing Supply Decision in an Airline, Publication No. 273, Department
d'Informatique, Universite de Montreal (November), 1977.
27. W. G. Williamson, "Computer Programs for Fleet and Schedule Planning,"
thesis, Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics, MIT (January), 1981.
29. A. L. Elias, The Development of an Operational Game for the U.S. Domestic
(February), 1979.
Flight Transportation Laboratory, Department of Aeronautics and Astron
of Airline Schedules, Potomic Scheduling, Washington, D.C., 1978.
34. T. Kushige, "A Solution of Most Profitable Aircraft Routing," AGIFORS 3,
35. R. Miller, Efficiency in the Domestic Trunk Airline Industry: An Applica
tion of Linear Programming, unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department
of Economics, Princeton University, 1961.
37. R. Miller, Domestic Airline Efficiency: An Application of Linear Program
38. D. F. X. Mathaisel, Fleet Planning for the Air Transport Industry: Network
Aggregation and Cell Theory, Ph.D. dissertation, Massachusetts Institute
of Technology, Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics (December),
Variable Demand: A Goal Programming Approach, paper submitted to the
for Olympic Airways Fleet Assignment Problems, MIT Flight Transpor
tation Laboratory Memorandum (October), 1983.
No. 22, Dept. of Industrial Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, 1974.
46. W. Swan, FA-7: 1977 Version of the Linear Programming Fleet Assignmen
gorithm and the Port Linkage Problem, Technical Report No. 10, Depart
51. R. J. Richardson, "An Optimization Approach to Routing Aircraft," Trans.
52. R. W. Simpson, Computerized Schedule Construction for an Airline Trans
portation System, MIT Flight Transportation Laboratory Report FIL R66
57. D. teWinkel, "An Algorithm for Aircraft Scheduling in a Radial Network,"
McDonnell Douglas Corporation Paper No. 6096, Douglas Aircraft Com
pany (December), 1972.
62. R. J. Wan and R. N. Jowett, Airline Schedule Model, Lockheed-Georgia
68. T. Teong, "Route Schedule Planning System," AGIFORS 21, 1981.
69. D. Barnard, "Aircraft Feasibility Model," AGIFORS 20, 1980.
71. M. M. Etschmaier and M. Rothstein, Airline Maintenance and the Flight
Forum, 1974.
ity," AGIFORS 18, 1977.
Scheduling," Trans. ScL 19, 107-126 (1985).
and Maintenance Planning," AGIFORS 17, 1977.
77. C. J. Bird, "A Branch and Bound Approach to Aircraft and Maintenance
79. R. W. Simpson and D. F. X. Mathaisel, Automation of Airlift Scheduling
