Abstract: This study provides a detailed analysis of an optimal drivetrain configuration, based on multi-cycles, for a plug-in
electric vehicle (EV). The investigation aims to identify the best EV configuration according to the required power and the
transmissible traction torque. The study focuses on an EV with four different combinations of drive systems among in-wheel
motors and differential ones. To find out the best EV drive system configuration, it is adopted an optimisation process by means
of a genetic algorithm that defines the electric motors (EMs) torque curves and powertrain transmission ratio in order to improve
vehicle travel range and performance. The vehicle power demand is divided between the drive systems following rules
established by the power management control which aims to reduce the lithium-ion battery discharges during the driving cycles:
FTP-75 (urban driving), HWFET (highway driving) and US06 (high speeds and accelerations). After the simulations, the
potential of each configuration is indicated according to its respective drive system and hence the best configurations are
determined.
The need for alternative energy sources to reduce CO emission is
one of the greatest challenges nowadays [1]. The unstable cost of
petroleum, political dependence caused by imported resources and
the stringent fuel-efficiency standards increase the demand for
electric and hybrid vehicles [2]. Therefore, more attention has been
given to researches on this kind of vehicles [3].
There are several configuration models of electric vehicles
(EVs) and, in certain conditions; these ones are more suitable than
others considering the advantages and disadvantages of each. In
this paper, four different EVs configurations with two different
ways of electric motors (EMs) coupling as proposed by [4, 5] are
studied. They can be observed in Fig. 1.
In the first configuration (EV1), there are four EMs coupled
directly to the vehicle wheels (in-wheel EMs) similar to described
by Sakai et al. [6]. In the second configuration (EV2), two EMs are
coupled to differential systems that increase the EMs speed and the
final output torque at the vehicle wheels. This configuration is
modelled according to Mutoh et al. [7, 8] that propose independent
driving systems to be connected to the front and the rear wheels.
The other configurations are combinations of the last two. Thus,
the third configuration (EV3) represents the EMs coupled directly
to the front wheels while the rear wheels having a differential
system. Finally, the fourth configuration (EV4) has its vehicle front
wheels propelled by an EM coupled to a differential system and its
rear wheels being driven by two in-wheel EMs.
In the simulations, the EMs’ power is provided by lithium-ion
batteries that were chosen because of their high energy densities
and long lifetime [9]. With respect to the EMs, they were used the
brushless DC ones due to their low weight, high efficiency and
compact size what make them as an interesting option for EV
propulsion systems [10].
In previous work [11], it was studied the minimum battery size
for an EV (with two independent drive systems) submitted to the
standard Brazilian urban driving cycle NBR6601 [12]. Since the
EVs normally have a limited autonomy range (100–200 km) [13],
the study presented in [5] evaluates the travel range for the EV1,
EV2 and EV3 configurations (Fig. 1) according to the combination
of three available EMs (5, 12 and 30 kW). In addition, this paper
aims to optimise the EV travel distance by defining the optimum
EM/drivetrain configuration that reduces the battery discharges
without decreasing the vehicle performance during a combined
driving cycle. This driving cycle represents a mix of different
profiles: FTP-75 (urban driving), HWFET (highway driving) and
US06 (high speeds and accelerations) [14]. Moreover, an estimated
range of EV is obtained from Simulink/Matlab™ after simulating
the battery discharge and travelled distance on previous driving
cycle.
To evaluate the longitudinal dynamic behaviour of the vehicle, it is
implemented the equations proposed by Gillespie [15] for a
conventional vehicle propelled by means of an engine/powertrain
system with some available transmission ratio. Nevertheless, the
equations are adapted for an EV configuration. The model is based
on the movement resistance forces as the rolling and climbing
resistance, aerodynamic drag and vehicle acceleration.
The rolling resistance (R ) is related to the energy lost by the
tire deformation and adhesion on contact area. At low speeds, the
rolling resistance is the main resistance load, and it is estimated by
(1) as a function of the vehicle weight (W) (N), multiplied by a
dimensionless rolling resistance coefficient that expresses the
effects of the interdependent physical properties of tire and ground
[15] as a function of the vehicle speed (V) (m/s)
W 0.01 + 2.24 × 10
The air resistance against the car passage is named aerodynamic
drag (D ). This resistance force is defined by the air density (ρ)
(kg/m ), vehicle frontal area (A) (m ) and an empirical constant
based on the vehicle geometry known as drag coefficient (C ) as
shown in the following equation:
1
= ρV C
2
The climbing resistance represents the road grade influence in the
vehicle dynamics. Since the road grade is considered null in the
simulated driving cycles, the climbing resistance is disregarded in
the calculations.
As told before, the analyses considered four different EV
combinations for propelling. The first (EV1) consists of in-wheel
motors coupled directly to the vehicle wheels without any
transmission system. The requested torque (T ) for this
configuration is shown in (3) as a function of the vehicle
acceleration (a ) (m/s ), mass M (kg), the tire external radius (r)
(m) and the wheels and tires inertia (I ) (kgm ) in which are also
considered the in-wheel motors inertia
The second propulsion system configuration (EV2) consists of
EMs coupled to differential transmission systems. In this case, the
requested torque (T ) is defined by (4) considering the differential
inertia (I ) (kgm ) and transmission ratio (N ) of the frontal ( ) and
rear ( ) drive systems
The configurations EV3 and EV4 are a combination of EV1 and
EV2, which one of the propulsion systems is composed of two inwheel EMs, and the another one is a single EM coupled to a
differential transmission. In both cases, the T is defined as
The total requested torque T (Nm) is evaluated by the power
management control (PMC) according to the EV configuration
(Fig. 1). Then, the PMC splits T between the rear [T (Nm)] and
front [T (Nm)] propulsion systems, in order to keep the overall
system running in the maximum available energy efficiency,
without compromising the EV performance
If the propulsion system ( / ) is assembled in-wheel, the EM
requested power is divided equally between both EMs as shown in
(7). When the drive system is supported by a differential system,
the requested torque is divided by the differential transmission ratio
N and the mechanical efficiency (η ) according to (8)
According to Gillespie [15], the vehicle acceleration is limited by
the available driving power and restricted by the tire traction. Thus,
the PMC needs to consider the tire transmissible traction force in
the definition of T and T to avoid performance losses. The
vehicle traction limit is modelled as proposed by Jazar [16], that
takes into consideration the weight transferred during the vehicle
acceleration and the tire-ground peak coefficient of friction μ
Mgc
μ −
2L
Mgb
μ +
2L
where L is the vehicle wheelbase (m); h is the vehicle gravity
centre height (m); g is the gravity acceleration (m/s ); b is the
longitudinal distance between the vehicle front axle and the gravity
centre (m); and c is the longitudinal distance between the vehicle
rear axle and the gravity centre (m).
The simulated EV presents dimensions similar to a conventional
vehicle studied in [17]. The parameters applied in the simulations
are shown in Table 1. As previously mentioned, when the EM is
used in-wheel, its inertia is added to the wheels and tires inertia
(I ). When the EM is coupled to the differential system, an
equivalent inertia (I ) is considered. These inertias values change
according to the EM power defined by the optimisation process
and they are interpolated based on reference standard values.
The driving profiles depend on a considerable parameter set such
as traffic condition, topography and characteristics of the driver
[2]. The driving cycle is established to represent the driver
behaviour in the simulations. The requested vehicle acceleration
(a ) is defined by the difference between the current vehicle speed
and the proposed velocity profile. In this paper, the EV
performance and battery state of charge (SoC) are evaluated facing
a combination of three cycles which represent different driving
conditions. The FTP-75 urban cycle (Fig. 2a) denotes a low power
demand and several short acceleration sections. The HWFET cycle
(Fig. 2b) represents a long highway at high speed, and the US06
cycle (Fig. 2c) is characterised by high acceleration sections that
increase the battery discharges. In high acceleration sections, the
tire traction limit strongly influences the vehicle acceleration
performance and, consequently, the PMC power distribution
between the rear and front drive systems.
The Simulink™ database lithium-ion battery was used to simulate
a 300 kg battery model with nominal voltage of 400 V according to
Sanfélix et al. [18]. The battery life cycle can be dramatically
Table 1 Simulated vehicle parameters [17]
Components
reduced when the batteries discharge completely [19], and by this
way the battery SoC must be limited [20]. The SoC is a measure of
the capacity available compared with the full SoC [21]. In the
simulations, the battery SoC is limited to 40% as adopted by Silva
et al. [11] and Eckert et al. [20].
In this work, it is not used a mathematical model for electric
motors, but rather a motor torque curve. The EM current
consumption I (A) is determined by (11), according to the
requested torque (T = T or T = T ), the EM speed ω ,
the battery voltage V (V) and the inverter (η ) and EM (η )
efficiencies
Equation (11) is applied to the front and the rear propulsion
systems, once the EMs and inverter efficiency vary according to
the EM torque curve and EM coupling configuration. The sum of
the requested current I of both propulsion systems EMs is sent to
the battery, reducing the battery SoC. Since the EMs torque curves
are modified according to the optimisation process results, the EM
torque curve and efficiency map used in the simulations is
determined according to Fig. 3.
The optimisation algorithm determines the EM maximum
torque T and the final speed of the constant torque phase (ω ).
According to Tong [22], the best operation point for the EM is
located on the constant power phase running with torque between
10 and 30% of the maximum torque T . On the basis of these
values, a second point of the torque curve is defined according to
the recommended upper limit (30% T ). Once the torque T is
determined in (12), the EM speed ω can be calculated by the EM
power (that is considered constant in this operation region) as
shown in (13)
= 0.3T
The EM maximum speed (ω ), where the EM torque becomes
null, is defined as a linear progression of the two defined points.
The EM efficiency η map is interpolated as a function of the
defined EM torque curve. The inverter efficiency η
estimated based on Table 2.
5.1 Regenerative braking
The regenerative braking system allows the vehicle to recover the
kinetic energy during deceleration [24]. When the vehicle is
braking, the EMs are controlled to operate as a generator,
converting the vehicle kinetic energy into electricity that is stored
in the battery. This energy is then used in future accelerations [25].
The EM regeneration capacity is limited to 5% of a maximum
torque curve of each EM according to Corrêa et al. [5]. When the
EMs are regenerating at the maximum capacity, the residual brake
torque (to keep the vehicle at the cycle requested speed) is
provided by a friction of the mechanical brake system to guarantee
the vehicle deceleration performance [26]. In this paper, the
mechanical brake system is based only on the negative requested
torque of (3), (4) or (5). According to Tara et al. [27], the battery
charging can only be done below the maximum charging current.
The EV PMC analyses the vehicle requested torque (T ),
estimated in function of the motion resistance forces provided by
(3), (4) or (5) according to the EV configuration, and splits it
between the front and rear drive systems according to the available
torque at the wheels for each system (T and T ). Each EM
presents an efficiency map (Fig. 3) which is associated with the
power inverter that also has a respective efficiency map (Table 2).
These maps vary according to the EMs torque curves defined by
the optimisation algorithm results.
Table 2 Inverter efficiency map adapted from [23]
is also To ensure that the EMs/inverters are operating in the best
possible regime (that minimises the battery discharge) it is
proposed a strategy that analyses all possible divisions of power
between the front and rear axles. This power split is executed in a
discrete way by a loop (1% of variation among the T split
possibilities). Therefore, the current necessary to supply each
power set is calculated, and the option that produces the smallest
current is chosen. The control results in an output torque that keeps
the vehicle at the desired speed with the minimum battery
discharge and according to the propulsion system efficiency and
also the EM coupling configuration.
The PMC also considers the maximum transmissible torque
(T and T ) related to tire-road conditions to avoid
performance losses by sending more torque than the contact
between tire and ground can transmit. In other words, the PMC
shares the power between the available drive systems in proportion
to the minimum consumption of current [I (A)] and among all
possibilities that does not overcome the respective propulsion
system tires traction limit.
Fig. 4 shows the PMC control to minimise the battery
discharges. It can be seen that other possibilities are considered in
the PMC algorithm, for example, the use of the maximum possible
torque from one of the drive systems T or T (after evaluating the
tire traction limits) and also the complementation of the remaining
torque by the other propulsion system when it is necessary (T
= T − T ). If the sum of the available torques from both
propulsion systems becomes lower than the requested torque (T +
T < T ), the PMC uses the maximum available torques,
disregarding the energy efficiency, and so trying to reach a better
performance along the driving cycle.
, rad/s
0.5ω
The purpose of the optimisation is to minimise the battery
discharges by establishing the most efficient EV configuration. It is
important to highlight that lower power EMs minimise the battery
discharges, however they decrease the vehicle performance
because they cannot meet the requested power to follow the driving
cycle speed.
The vehicle performance is evaluated by means of the
correlation coefficient R [17, 20]. It compares the simulated vehicle
speed with the standard driving cycles according to (14) where V
represents the cycle speed at discrete time points, V refers to the
simulated vehicle speed, and V and V are associated mean values.
The perfect match between the simulated speed profile and the
standard cycle results in R = 1, what means that the vehicle may
follow the requested speed profile in all cycle sections
The objective functions for a bi-criteria optimisation process are
defined to maximise the final battery SoC (f ) and also to maximise
the vehicle performance R (f )
ax f (X) = SoC(X)
ax f (X) =
Subject to: constrains C presented in (17). These constrains
represent the battery discharge limit, EMs and powertrain
restrictions
SoC ≥
T
C(X) =
As previously mentioned, smaller EMs present lower power
consumption, however, the minimisation of the EMs by the
optimisation process, may generate EV configurations with a long
drive range, but with a poor performance especially in the high
speed sections. To avoid this, the vehicle performance is also used
as a constrain and, the EV performance should be at least equal to
the performance (R ≥ 0.9842) reached from the conventional 1.0 l
combustion engine vehicle simulated in [17], which is submitted to
the same driving cycles studied in this paper. Simulation results
with lower performance like the conventional vehicle are
disregarded in the optimisation process.
To solve the optimisation problem, the i-AWGA is implemented as
proposed by Gen et al. [28] with an improvement of the AWGA
[29] and considering a penalty fitness (Ft) value for the dominated
solutions.
8.1 Design variables
The input parameters for the rear and front drive systems are
gathered in a chromosome X as shown in (18). where the variable
N represents the quantity of electric motors used (N = 2
refers to in-wheel motors and N = 1 refers to single EM
combined with the differential system)
[X] = [T
N
For the in-wheel configuration, the transmission ratio N is
considered equal to 1 in the same way that the mechanical
efficiency of the transmission η is equal to 1 because the EMs are
connected directly to the vehicle wheels. On the other hand, when
the EM is coupled to the differential system, the transmission ratio
is defined according to the constrains C (17) and the efficiency of
η becomes equal to 0.9.
8.2 Ft adaptive weight approach
The Ft value is defined by weighted-sum approach, to avoid
inaccuracy in the definition of appropriate weights that are difficult
to determine [29]. The adaptive weight approach defines weight
values according to the maximum (z ) and minimum (z ) values
of each optimisation criteria (k) for the Ft value f (X) (1 ≤ k ≤ 2) of
one solution X in the population (P)
max { f (X)|(X) ∈
min { f (X)|(X) ∈
The adaptive weight method readjusts the weight (w (X)) values for
each population member (1 ≤ i ≤ N), as shown in (21) for a
maximisation problem
X) − z
w (X) =
z
A penalty value p (X) is added in the Ft value, according to the
frontier of non-dominated compromised solutions (Pareto-rank of
P (X) = 1) between the optimisation criteria f and f . For the
maximisation problem, the penalty values are defined as
p (X) =
The final Ft value is defined by the sum of the adaptive weigh w(X)
with the penalty value p(X) as shown in (23), and the population is
ordered in function of the fitness Ft(i) values
Ft(i) = w (X) +
8.3 Selection
The roulette wheel technique is applied to the selection of the
population members for the genetic algorithm (GA). For each
population member (i), it is assigned a roulette-wheel slot
proportional to its Ft value Ft(i). The selection probability S (i) is
defined in (24) by the sum of Ft values for all the population
members (1 ≤ j ≤ N)
Ft(i)
S (i) =
∑ Ft( j)
This probability defines a numerical interval used in the selection
process as shown in the following equation:
q(i) =
The selection algorithm chooses two different population members
(M and M ) defining a random value r ∈ (0, 1]. If r < q the first
population member chromosome is selected, otherwise the
population members selection is defined as q < r < q .
8.4 Crossover and mutation process
The crossover operator combines the selected members M and M
and the chromosomes [X] to generate two new set of parameters to
perform a new simulation. The first combined chromosome keeps
the frontal propulsion system from M and the rear driving system
from M . The second combined chromosome uses the frontal
system from chromosome M and the rear system from M . The
new simulations are then performed and the results are stored in the
population database.
To insert different parameters values into the population, the
mutation operator changes some of the design variables of the
chromosomes generated by the crossover process. The mutation
operator defines randomly the variables that will mutate by setting
a random value (v ∈ [0, 1]) for each design variable using the
Matlab function rand. In case of v < 0.5, the design variable
maintains the original value and if v ≥ 0.5, the variable value is
mutated by adding a random value MT according to the mutation
limits (Table 3) defined for each design variable. If one of the
mutated parameters does not respect the defined constrains, as
presented in (17), or the generated chromosome does not present
mutation in any of the variables, this chromosome is discarded and
a new mutation process is performed until finding a mutated
chromosome that agrees with the constrains C.
The last mutation possibility is to change the EV configuration
by inverting the rear and front propulsion systems. This will
change the vehicle behaviour because of the tire traction limits that
are different for the frontal and rear wheels. Then, the mutation
process generates two new chromosomes, which are simulated and
Table 3 Mutation limits for each propelling system
Crossover variable Mutation v ∈ [0, 1] Mutated
values if v < 0.5 if v ≥ 0.5 variables
Table 4 Selected solutions results
EV configuration Solutions Performance R Final battery SoC, % Fitness Ft Travelled distance, km E
the results are added to the population. The new EMs and
differential inertias are rearranged according to the new mutated
values that were defined.
8.5 Population and convergence criteria
The initial population is composed of 40 members with randomly
generated chromosomes [X]. The population enlarges by the
addition of the crossover and mutation results. To control the
population size, the last Pareto rank results are eliminated when the
population size reaches P = 50 members. If the non-dominated
population (Pr(X) = 1) reaches the P , the population limit is
redefined as P = P + 50. The algorithm stops when the Pareto
frontier remains the same for over ten crossover/mutations sets of
simulations.
The convergence of the GA algorithm ends in a set of nondominated solutions that are defined as Pareto frontier. Fig. 5a
shows all the results, generated by the GA algorithm, that present
performance above the minimum performance limit (R = 0.9842).
The EV configurations that compose the Pareto frontier of nondominated solution are shown in Fig. 5b in which it can be
observed that only the EV configurations EV1, EV3 and EV4 are
in the frontier, furthermore these configurations also demonstrate
performance and final SoC better than EV2 configuration.
To perform a comparative analysis, three results from the Pareto
frontier were selected: the maximum performance (R) reached by
an EV1 configuration, the maximum SoC of the battery that was
performed by an EV3 configuration and also the solution with the
higher Ft value reached by an EV1 configuration and showing the
best compromised solution. Table 4 shows the results reached by
these configurations.
stimated drive range, km
The maximum performance result (R = 0.9999) followed the
cycles requested speed in all sections and its travelled distance was
the same as the sum of the three cycles that is 47.17 km. In the
other hand, the maximum SoC solution presented a lower battery
discharge and it was not able to fulfil the cycle speed profile in
some stretches, showing a performance decrease and,
consequently, a lower travelled distance.
The configuration EV4 is also an alternative for a compromised
solution between vehicle performance and battery SoC. This
configuration presented solutions mixed with the EV3
configuration in the Pareto frontier (Fig. 5b) because both of them
used in-wheel EMs at least in one drive system and a single EM
coupled to a differential reduction in the other propel system. With
the correct combination among the design variables and PMC for
these configurations it was possible to find out possible optimum
solutions.
The EV drive range was estimated from the vehicle travelled
distance and also by the battery SoC to perform the driving cycles.
The drive range consists in the repeatability of these speed profiles
until the battery reaches the minimum allowed SoC (SoC = 40%).
A configuration that prioritises performance presents a travel
distance close to the requested by the cycle, but also presents
higher battery discharges that results in a lower drive range
compared with EV configurations that aim to save the battery
power, even if the EV remains unable to keep the requested speed
in some section reducing the travelled distance as compared with
the standard cycles.
The EMs parameters from the selected solutions are shown in
Table 5.
There are different ways to couple the EM to vehicle wheels,
Fig. 6 shows the available torque at the vehicle wheels. The inwheel EMs torque is multiplied by two, because there is one EM in
each wheel thus two wheels/motors for each independent
propulsion system. Among the selected results only the maximum
SoC presents a differential transmission associated with an EM, to
propel the EV rear system (EV3) and, in this case, the EM output
torque is multiplied by the differential transmission ratio (N =
6.42) and also by a mechanical efficiency factor (η = 0.9).
The EV battery behaviour during the simulated driving cycles is
shown in Fig. 7a. It is possible to observe that the battery SoC
presents a lower curve decrease in the FTP-75 cycle. It happens
because the urban driving presents a lower speed with a moderate
requested power and also many small sections where the EV is not
moving (no battery discharges). The next cycle, (HWFET)
highway behaviour, presents a higher battery discharge because the
requested power increases due to the aerodynamic drag that
represents the major parcel of the vehicle movement resistance
forces in highway drive condition (high speed and low
Table 5 Selected solutions chromosomes
Propelling system
Chromosome X
acceleration). When the EV reaches the US06 cycle, the battery
presents the largest discharges due to the high speeds as in the
HWFET cycle and also because of the high acceleration section
that requires a large amount of power from the battery to keep the
vehicle at the requested speed and also, in this section, the most of
configurations using both propulsion systems become closer to the
maximum output torque.
Fig. 7b shows the battery SoC discharge rate (%/s). There are
only few small positive points that indicate regenerative braking.
These points are associated with the long braking sections of the
cycles, however, it cannot provide expressive changes in the
battery SoC. It happens basically because of the high battery
capacity that is necessary to provide power to the EMs that request
an amount of power several times more than its regenerative
capacity.
Moreover, in Fig. 7b it is possible to observe that the maximum
Ft and maximum SoC solution present lower discharge rates as
compared with the maximum R solution in the US06 cycle. The
maximum SoC presents less discharge in the HWFET cycle
section. These differences occur because of the drive torque limits,
in other words, configurations that aim to save battery charge use
smaller EMs that operate its better efficiency in the urban
behaviour and it represents the largest part of the EV operation
time in the simulated cycles.
However, when the EV reaches the high speed sections these
optimised EMs for urban cycle are operating at a constant power
phase where the output torque decrease with the EM speed
increase. Therefore, when the request torque T becomes superior
to the sum of the available torques for both propulsion systems (at
high speed the tire traction is not the vehicle acceleration limiter),
the vehicle is unable to increase the velocity and the EV
performance decrease, thus it remains at a constant speed limit
until the requested power decreases. Fig. 8 shows the difference
among the solutions in the sections where the EVs present
performance losses.
The maximum performance solution represents the cycle
request speed. Also, it is possible to observe that the maximum Ft
solution is limited to 115 km/h and the minimum SoC
configuration is limited to 88 km/h at maximum speed. All the
results of this paper present better performance as compared with a
single power source low power conventional vehicle propelled by
an engine associated to a 5 ratio gearbox and differential system
simulated in [17]. This is because the conventional vehicle presents
a performance decrease by the clutch decoupling during the several
gear shiftings for the driving cycles and also due to the engine
available power and tire transmissible torque at the high
acceleration section of the US06 cycle.
Front
The EVs studied in this paper present performance limited by
the EMs torque curve as mentioned previously, however other
limitations are outlined. For example, the EVs are composed of
two propulsion systems, therefore the tire traction limitation is
mostly solved by transferring the power demand from the drive
system, that exceeds the tire traction to the other one.
In this paper, it was studied the influence of the propulsion systems
configurations in an EV. Four EV configurations were proposed
and a GA was implemented to optimise the electric motors torque
curves and define the configuration that presents the lower battery
discharge (max SoC) without decreasing the vehicle performance
under an acceptable limit.
The optimisation result, in a set of optimised compromised
solutions, was composed of the configurations EV1 with four inwheel EMs, and by EV3/EV4 configurations that associate two inwheel EMs in one propulsion system and EM + differential in the
other drive system. This configurations present better performance
and battery SoC than the EV2 configuration that uses EMs +
differential in both propel systems.
The solutions that present the best result for each optimisation
criteria and the best compromised solution were selected. The
battery and vehicle longitudinal behaviour were compared. The
maximum performance solution was reached by an EV1
configuration that was able to fulfil the cycles requested speed in
all the section, and it presented 176.3 km as an estimated drive
range. The maximum SoC solution was achieved by an EV3
configuration that presented 203.35 km drive range representing
15.34% of improvement, however, this configuration showed a
performance decrease that reduce the final travelled range in
6.13%, because these EV had a speed limit of 88 km/h making it
unable to reach the cycle desired speed in some sections. Finally,
the best compromised solution (maximum Ft) is also an EV1 that
provides 185.9 km of drive range (5.45% more than the maximum
performance and 8.58% less than the maximum SoC) with 0.42%
decrease in the travelled distance as compared with the standard
cycles and 115 km/h as maximum speed.
Finally, all the results and discussions have led to the design
procedure that ensures all operating conditions for longitudinal
dynamics. In future studies, optimised PMC will be implemented
for each optimum drivetrain configuration. Also, advanced models
will be developed including the lateral dynamics, therefore an
overview about stability applied in EV configuration possibly will
be held.
This work was conducted during scholarships supported by the
Brazilian Federal Agency for Support and Evaluation of Graduate
Education (CAPES), the National Council for Scientific and
Technological Development (CNPq) and the State University of
Campinas (UNICAMP)
Rahman, K.M., Patel, N.R., Ward, T.G., et al.: ‘Application of direct-drive
wheel motor for fuel cell electric and hybrid electric vehicle propulsion
system’, IEEE Trans. Ind. Appl., 2006, 42, (5), pp. 1185–1192
Schwarzer, V., Ghorbani, R.: ‘Drive cycle generation for design optimization
of electric vehicles’, IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., 2013, 62, (1), pp. 89–97
Liu, P., Liu, H.P.: ‘Permanent-magnet synchronous motor drive system for
electric vehicles using bidirectional z-source inverter’, IET Electr. Syst.
Transp., 2012, 2, (4), pp. 178–185
Yuan, X., Wang, J.: ‘Torque distribution strategy for a front-and rear-wheeldriven electric vehicle’, IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., 2012, 61, (8), pp. 3365–
3374
Corrêa, F.C., Eckert, J.J., Silva, L.C., et al.: ‘Study of different electric vehicle
propulsion system configurations’. Vehicle Power and Propulsion Conf.
(VPPC), 2015, 2015
Sakai, S.-i., Sado, H., Hori, Y.: ‘Motion control in an electric vehicle with
four independently driven in-wheel motors’, IEEE/ASME Trans.
Mechatronics, 1999, 4, (1), pp. 9–16
Mutoh, N., Kazama, T., Takita, K.: ‘Driving characteristics of an electric
vehicle system with independently driven front and rear wheels’, IEEE Trans.
Ind. Electron., 2006, 53, (3), pp. 803–813
Kang, J., Yoo, J., Yi, K.: ‘Driving control algorithm for maneuverability,
lateral stability, and rollover prevention of 4WD electric vehicles with
independently driven front and rear wheels’, IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., 2011,
60, (7), pp. 2987–3001
Gao, L., Liu, S., Dougal, R.A.: ‘Dynamic lithium-ion battery model for
system simulation’, IEEE Trans. Compon. Packag. Technol., 2002, 25, (3),
pp. 495–505
Yang, Y.-P., Chuang, D.S.: ‘Optimal design and control of a wheel motor for
electric passenger cars’, IEEE Trans. Magn., 2007, 43, (1), pp. 51–61
Silva, L.C., Eckert, J.J., Santiciolli, F.M., et al.: ‘A study of battery power for
a different electric vehicle propulsion system’. Int. Conf. on Electrical
Systems for Aircraft, Railway, Ship Propulsion and Road Vehicles (ESARS),
2015, 2015
NBR6601: ‘Light road motor vehicles – Determination of hydrocarbons,
carbon monoxide, nitrogen oxides, carbon dioxides and particulate matter in
the exhaust gas’, ABNT Std., October 2005
Hofman, T., Dai, C.: ‘Energy efficiency analysis and comparison of
transmission technologies for an electric vehicle’. Vehicle Power and
Propulsion Conf. (VPPC), 2010 IEEE, 2010, pp. 1–6
Barlow, T.J., Latham, S., McCrae, I.S., et al.: ‘A reference book of driving
cycles for use in the measurement of road vehicle emissions’. TRL Published
Project Report, 2009
Gillespie, T.D.: ‘Fundamentals of vehicle dynamics’ (Society of Automotive
Engineers – SAE, Warrendale, PA, USA, 1992)
Jazar, R.N.: ‘Vehicle dynamics. Theory and applications’ (Springer Science+
Business Media, New York, NY, USA: Springer, 2008)
Eckert, J.J., Corrêa, F.C., Santiciolli, F.M., et al.: ‘Vehicle gear shifting
strategy optimization with respect to performance and fuel consumption’,
Mech. Based Des. Struct. Mach., 2016, 44, pp. 123–136
Sanfélix, J., Messagie, M., Omar, N., et al.: ‘Environmental performance of
advanced hybrid energy storage systems for electric vehicle applications’,
Appl. Energy, 2015, 137, pp. 925–930
Fuhs, A.: ‘Hybrid vehicles: and the future of personal transportation’ (CRC
Press, 2008)
Eckert, J.J., Santiciolli, F.M., Silva, L.C.A., et al.: ‘Co-simulation to evaluate
acceleration performance and fuel consumption of hybrid vehicles’, J. Braz.
Soc. Mech. Sci. Eng. (BMSE), 2016, pp. 1–14, DOI: 10.1007/
s40430-015-0484-4
Tannahill, V.R., Sutanto, D., Muttaqi, K., et al.: ‘Future vision for reduction of
range anxiety by using an improved state of charge estimation algorithm for
electric vehicle batteries implemented with low-cost microcontrollers’, IET
Electr. Syst. Transp., 2014, 5, (1), pp. 24–32
Tong, W.: ‘Mechanical design of electric motors’ (CRC Press, Broken Sound
Parkway NW, Suite 300 Boca Raton, FL, 2014)
Rotering, N., Ilic, M.: ‘Optimal charge control of plug-in hybrid electric
vehicles in deregulated electricity markets’, IEEE Trans. Power Syst., 2011,
26, (3), pp. 1021–1029
Lv, C., Zhang, J., Li, Y., et al.: ‘Mechanism analysis and evaluation
methodology of regenerative braking contribution to energy efficiency
improvement of electrified vehicles’, Energy Convers. Manage., 2015, 92, pp.
469–482
Junzhi, Z., Yutong, L., Chen, L., et al.: ‘New regenerative braking control
strategy for rear-driven electrified minivans’, Energy Convers. Manage.,
2014, 82, pp. 135–145
Zhang, J., Lv, C., Gou, J., et al.: ‘Cooperative control of regenerative braking
and hydraulic braking of an electrified passenger car’. Proc. Institution of
Mechanical Engineers, Part D: Journal of Automobile Engineering, 2012, pp.
1289–1302
Tara, E., Shahidinejad, S., Filizadeh, S., et al.: ‘Battery storage sizing in a
retrofitted plug-in hybrid electric vehicle’, IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., 2010,
59, (6), pp. 2786–2794
Gen, M., Cheng, R., Lin, L.: ‘Network models and optimization:
multiobjective genetic algorithm approach’ (Springer Science & Business
Media, Verlag London, 2008)
Gen, M., Cheng, R.: ‘Genetic algorithms and engineering optimization’ (John
Wiley & Sons, Third Avenue 605, New York, NY, 2000), vol. 7
