Chord length, 20.3 cm
Actuation frequency, Hz
Reduced frequency, f · c/U
Reynolds number based on c
Freestream velocity
Angle of attack, degrees
Low Reynolds number effects are significant in the aerodynamics of low speed airfoils, aircraft intended to operate
in low-density environments, and small scale lifting surfaces
such as insect and bird wings. Current aerodynamic applications include Micro Aerial Vehicles and Unmanned Aerial
Vehicles (µAVs and UAVs), as well as aircraft operating
at high altitudes or low density atmospheres other than
Earth’s.
The primary difficulty with the operation of a wing at
low Reynolds number is that the flow over the suction surface encounters an adverse pressure gradient at a point at
which the boundary layer is quite likely to still be laminar.
Since a laminar boundary layer is incapable of negotiating
any but the slightest adverse pressure gradient, the flow will
inevitably separate. The separated flow then transitions to
turbulence, entrains fluid and re-attaches to form a turbulent boundary layer. The resulting structure is the laminar
separation bubble, which has been described by Lissaman.
A number of different flow control approaches have been
investigated to reduce separation and improve efficiency at
low Reynolds numbers. Continuous blowing and sucking
have long been shown to have pronounced effects. More
recently, intermittent blowing and sucking in the form of
synthetic jets have shown their effectiveness, and suggest the
presence of optimum values in the range of frequency inputs,
which may translate to other oscillatory inputs. Mechanical momentum transfer and acoustic excitation have also
been explored.
The approach presented herein employs an adaptive
wing. Naturally, all practical wings are adaptive in the
sense that they use actuators to alter lift coefficient by
changing effective profile with a subsequent loss in efficiency.
A truly adaptive wing, however, refers to an airfoil which
can change its profile to optimally adapt to flow conditions.
Similar concepts have been explored in the past, such as the
snap-through airfoil which changes local airfoil camber by
moving a flexible portion of the pressure surface, or the
DARPA smart wing which uses torsional elements to twist
the wing. Modern smart materials such as piezoelectric actuators offer great promise in the area of future stall control
applications, though simple mechanisms such as buzzing
bars have also been shown to be adequate stall control devices. The kind of adaptation which is of primary interest
here is one in which the rate of actuation is rapid, and may
be able to respond quickly enough to arrest or limit the
formation of laminar separation bubbles. At high Re, the
unsteady theory of Theodorsen may be utilized to solve
such problems (see Duffy et al. for an example), but at
low Re where viscous forces are predominate, there is no rigorous method to predict the unsteady effects of such rapid
actuation and how it will alter separation.
The adaptive wing design is based upon a static prototype
design constructed by Pinkerton and Moses as a feasibility
test for drag reduction. A modular wing was constructed
with a base profile of a NACA 4415. Each module has a
recess cut in the upper surface, into which a piezoelectric
actuator is placed. The actuators are mounted at such an
angle that they are even with the un-recessed airfoil section
when at their smallest effective radius (when most curved).
A thin plastic sheet is then placed over the actuator to
smooth the profile, and then the entire assembly is wrapped
in a latex membrane to hold it together and provide a seamless outer surface. When the actuator is displaced to its
greatest effective radius (closest to being flat) it protrudes
through the upper cross-section. The plastic sheet and latex
membrane smooth the upper surface increasing the effective
camber and moving the point of maximum thickness aft.
The device has been more fully described elsewhere.
Experiments with a circular-arc airfoil at low Re suggest
that an airfoil with oscillating camber will produce a higher
lift coefficient than the same airfoil at any fixed camber setting through separation control. The present experiment
attempts to extend this finding to airfoils of more ordinary
and more efficient cross-section. The current experiments
were conducted with four wing modules, assembled to form
a wing with a chord of eight inches and a span of 13 inches
giving an aspect ratio of 1.6. This wing was mounted in an
8×16 inch test section in a low-speed low-turbulence wind
tunnel. Smoke-wire flow visualization as described in Batill
and Mueller is used to mark the outer boundary of separated flow. Displacement of the actuators was measured
in situ with a Keyance LK-501 laser displacement sensor.
These measurements are accurate to within ±5% at all frequencies across the range of interest.
Flow visualization at Re = 2.5 · 10 and 5.0 · 10 clearly
shows large separated flow over the wing with the actuator static (f = 0). This is expected at low speeds with a
NACA 4415 profile which is not designed for low Reynolds
number flight. When the actuator is oscillating, the size of
the separated flow is greatly reduced. Figure 1 shows images
of the flow visualization for Re = 2.5 · 10 at two different
angles of attack for both uncontrolled and controlled runs
where f = 0 and f > 0, respectively. From the recorded
images, the size of the separated region at 70% of chord was
measured normal to the surface of the foil by determining
the distance from the airfoil surface to the mean location
of the first smoke streakline. These measurements are presented in Figures 2 and 3. The instrumental error in these
measurements amounts to ± 0.2 mm, or far less than one
percent of chord. This is dwarfed by the statistical error,
which can best be inferred from examining the scatter in the
dynamic data (variation in streakline location). The overall
error, then, is within ± 1% of chord.
The static measurements refer to those where the actuator
was kept in a stationary state at a number of pre-determined
positions. For these an increase in separation as angle of
attack increases is seen, which is what would be expected.
An increase in separation as Reynolds number decreases is
also seen. This is also as one would expect. The main
purpose of the static measurements was to provide a direct
comparison to the dynamic measurements. To that end the
minimum size observed is the value used in Fig. 4, which
represents a best case scenario for separated flow over an
unactuated airfoil.
Force and PIV measurements of the airfoil with static
shape changes were studied at a preliminary stage using
solid models over a range of overlapping Re corresponding to the flow visualization observations shown in Fig. 2.
Force measurements showed that both coefficients of lift and
drag showed a slight increase at intermediate settings of the
actuator, with an overall decrease in L/D of 6%. Maximum
actuator displacement also increased both lift and drag but
with an overall increase in L/D of 2%. This was confirmed
in the PIV measurements where it was revealed that the size
of the separation region increased and then decreased with
increasing static actuator position. The modest improvement in efficiency did not warrent further investigation of
static actuator effects, however. Moment coefficients were
not measured.
The dynamic measurements refer to those in which the
actuator was oscillated at a given frequency. The amplitude
of oscillation was normalized to ± 0.2 mm measured at 0.3c.
This represents a peak-to-peak displacement of 0.002c. For
frequencies above 70 Hz this normalization could not be
maintained without producing destructive sparks along the
edges of the actuator or at the attachment points of the
electrical leads and measurements at above this frequency
were thus taken with reduced maximum displacement. The
regions of normalized displacement and non-normalized displacement are noted on Fig. 3. The data is plotted in terms
of reduced frequency, f , where frequency is normalized by
chord length and free-stream velocity, f = f · c/U.
Measurements at a chord-based Reynolds number of 2.5 ·
10 show that the size of the separated flow is generally
reduced with increasing frequency up to the point where
normalization is lost. The measurements at α = 0 show
a broad minimum around f = 5. The measurement at
α = 3 may also indicate a minimum before normalization
is lost. At higher angles of attack though, where the decrease in separation is more significant, the improvement in
performance appears to continue up to the point of loss of
normalization. Past this point, where the amplitude of the
actuator oscillation diminishes, the performance of the foil
degrades at all angles of attack. It cannot be determined
from present data whether this increase in separation is due
to the decreased amplitude or the increased frequency, but
the former is suspected.
Observations at a Reynolds number of 5.0 · 10 show no
such degradation in performance past loss of normalization.
In the non-normalized range the separation is in the range
of 4 − 6% for all frequencies. In the normalized range the
same general trend is seen where separation is reduced with
increasing frequency. There is a possible shallow minimum
at α = 3 and f = 3, and another at α = 6 and f = 3.
From a more detailed analysis of Fig. 1, it can be shown
that the point of separation remains nearly the same when
comparing the uncontrolled and controlled cases. Since the
region of camber oscillation is downstream of the original
separation point, this indicates that the actutation is not
affecting the upstream flow but rather is aiding the flow
in navigating the adverse pressure graident in the region
of separation, most probably by direct energization of the
boundary layer. Note that the flow examined here is within
the transition range (Re < 5 · 10 ). Transition can be
located in the flow visualization images and is not observed
to significantly change chord-wise location when the flow
control is engaged.
Figure 4 shows the minimum observed separation for each
combination of α and Re for both the static and dynamic
cases. It can be seen from this plot that the application
of an oscillatory input holds the size of the separated flow
to 4 − 6% of chord. This is, of course, more significant for
the cases of higher angle of attack and for lower Reynolds
number, where the non-actuated flow has a larger separated
region. It remains to be seen if increasing amplitude will
further improve performance in this range.
Oscillating the curvature of the upper surface of a NACA
4415 airfoil has been shown through flow visualization to
have a pronounced effect in reducing the degree of separation over a foil at the Reynolds numbers of 2.5 · 10 and
5 · 10 . Under these conditions the unmodified flow can separate by as much as 0.15c or more. Separation, measured at
the 70% chord position, was held to 0.04 − 0.06c under angles of attack up to 9 by oscillating the upper surface with
an amplitude of 0.002c and reduced frequencies f ranging
from 0 to 11. This represents a reduction in the separated
flow size by 30% to 60% as compared to flow over a similarly shaped static wing. This technique shows significant
promise and it is expected that further tests will verify an
improved efficiency in terms of L/D.
This research was supported b Kentucky Space
Grant Consortium.
Lissaman, P. B. S., “Low-Reynolds-Number Airfoils,” Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics, Vol. 15, 1983, pp.
223–39.
Gad-el-Hak, M., Flow Control: Passive, Active, and Reactive Flow Management. Cambridge University press,
2000.
Amitay, M., Smith, D. R., Kibens, V., Parekh, D. E.,
and Glezer, A., “Aerodynamic Flow Control Over an
Unconventional Airfoil Using Synthetic Jet Actuators,”
AIAA Journal, Vol. 39, No. 3, 2001, pp. 361–370.
Greenblat, D., and Wygnanski, I., “Dynamic Stall Control by Periodic Excitation, Part 1: NACA 0015 Parametric Study,” Journal of Aircraft, Vol. 38, No. 3, 2001,
pp. 430–438.
Sinha, S. K., “Flow Separation Control with Microflexural
Wall Vibrations,” Journal of Aircraft, Vol. 38, No. 3,
2001, pp. 496–503.
Jacob, J. D., “On the Fluid Dynamics of Adaptive Airfoils,” Proceedings of the 1998 ASME International
Mechanical Engineering Congress and Exposition, Anaheim, CA, 1998.
Duffy, R. E., Dubben, J., Nickerson, J., and Colasante, J.,
“A Theoretical and Experimental Study of the SnapThrough Airfoil and its Potential as a High Harmonic
Control Device,” AIAA Paper 88-0668, Jan. 1988.
Kudva, J., Appa, K., Martin, C. A., Jardine, A.
P., Sendeckyj, G., Harris, T., McGowan, A., and
Lake, R., “Design, Fabrication, and Testing of the
DARPA/Wright Lab ‘Smart Wing’ Wind Tunnel
Model,” AIAA Paper 97-1198, April 1997.
Seifert, A., Eliahu, S., Greenblatt, D., and Wygnanski,
I., “Use of Piezoelectric Actuators for Airfoil Separation Control,” AIAA Journal, Vol. 36, No. 8, 1998, pp.
1535–1537.
Park, Y. W., Lee, S.-G., Lee, D.-H., and Hong, S., “Stall
Control with Local Surface Buzzing on a NACA 0012
Airfoil,” AIAA Journal, Vol. 39, No. 7, 2001, pp. 1400–
1402.
Theodorsen, T., “General Theory of Aerodynamic Stability and the Mechanism of Flutter,” NACA TR 496,
1935.
Duffy, R. E., Czajkowski, E. A., and Jaran, C., “Finite Element Approximation to Theororsen’s Solution
for Non-Steady Aerodynamics of an Airfoil Section,”
AIAA Paper 84-1640, June 1984.
Pinkerton, T. L. and Moses, R. W., “A Feasibility Study
to Control Airfoil Shape Using THUNDER,” NASA
TM-4767, 1997.
Munday, D., and Jacob, J. D. “Flow Control Experiments for Low-Re Adaptive Airfoils,” AIAA Paper
2000-0654, Jan. 2000.
Munday, D., and Jacob, J. D. “Active Control of Separation on a Wing with Conformal Camber,” AIAA
2001-0293, Jan. 2001.
Pern, N. J., Vortex Mitigation Using Adaptive Airfoils.
M. S. Thesis, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky, 1999.
Batill, S. and Mueller, T. “Visualization of Transition
in the Flow Over an Airfoil Using the Smoke Wire
Technique,” AIAA Journal, Vol. 19, No. 3, 1981, pp.
340–345.
